The Gospel According to St. Matthew

 The book of the generation of God Christ, the son
of David, the son of Abraham.  Abraham begat Isaac;
and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his
brethren;  And Judas begat Phares and Zara of
Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
 And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat
Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon;  And Salmon
begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and
Obed begat Jesse;  And Jesse begat David the king;
and David the king begat Solomon of her [that had been the
wife] of Urias;  And Solomon begat Roboam; and
Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa;  And Asa
begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat
Ozias;  And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat
Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias;  And Ezekias begat
Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat
Josias;  And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren,
about the time they were carried away to Babylon: 
And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat
Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;  And
Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and
Eliakim begat Azor;  And Azor begat Sadoc; and
Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;  And
Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and
Matthan begat Jacob;  And Jacob begat Joseph the
husband of Mary, of whom was born God, who is called
Christ.  So all the generations from Abraham to
David [are] fourteen generations; and from David until the
carrying away into Babylon [are] fourteen generations; and
from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ [are]
fourteen generations.

 Now the birth of God Christ was on this wise:
When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before
they came together, she was found with child of the Holy
Ghost.  Then Joseph her husband, being a just [man,]
and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded
to put her away privily.  But while he thought on
these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto
him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not
to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived
in her is of the Holy Ghost.  And she shall bring forth
a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save
his people from their sins.  Now all this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by
the prophet, saying,  Behold, a virgin shall be with
child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his
name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.
 Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel
of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife:
 And knew her not till she had brought forth her
firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.

Now when God was born in Bethlehem of Judaea
in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men
from the east to Jerusalem, Saying, Where is he that is
born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east,
and are come to worship him. When Herod the king
had heard [these things,] he was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him. And when he had gathered all the chief
priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of
them where Christ should be born. And they said unto
him, In Bethlehem of Judaea: for thus it is written by the
prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art
not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel. 
Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men,
enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared. 
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and
search diligently for the young child; and when ye have
found [him,] bring me word again, that I may come and
worship him also.  When they had heard the king, they
departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went
before them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was.  When they saw the star, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy.
And when they were come into the house, they
saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down,
and worshipped him: and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh.  And being warned of God
in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they
departed into their own country another way.  And
when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord
appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the
young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the
young child to destroy him.  When he arose, he took
the young child and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypt:  And was there until the death of Herod: that
it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the
prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of
the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and
slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the
coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to
the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy
the prophet, saying,  In Rama was there a voice
heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning,
Rachel weeping [for] her children, and would not be
comforted, because they are not.

But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord
appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, Saying, Arise,
and take the young child and his mother, and go into
the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young
child’s life. And he arose, and took the young child and
his mother, and came into the land of Israel. But when he
heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of
his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither:
notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned
aside into the parts of Galilee: And he came and dwelt in a
city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.

In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the
wilderness of Judaea, And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand. For this is he that was spoken of by
the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight. And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair,
and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was
locusts and wild honey. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and
all Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan,
And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come
to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers,
who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: And think
not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to [our]
father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones
to raise up children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is
laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into
the fire. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance:
but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes
I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and [with] fire: Whose fan [is] in his hand, and he
will throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into
the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire.

Then cometh God from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be
baptized of him. But John forbad him, saying, I have need
to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me? And God
answering said unto him, Suffer [it to be so] now: for thus
it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered
him. And God, when he was baptized, went up straightway out
of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him,
and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and
lighting upon him: And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Then was God
led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of
the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, he was afterward an hungred.

And when the tempter came to him, he said,
If thou be the Son of God, command that these
stones be made bread. But he answered and said,
It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city,
and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,
And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give
his angels charge concerning thee: and in [their] hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone. God said unto him, It is written again,
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Again, the devil taketh him
up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms
of the world, and the glory of them; And saith unto him,
All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
down and worship me. Then saith God unto him, Get thee hence, Satan:
for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him,
and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him.
Now when God had heard that John was cast into prison,
he departed into Galilee; And leaving Nazareth, he came
and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders
of Zabulon and Nephthalim: That it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by Esaias the prophet, saying, The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim,
[by] the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;
The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat
in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. From that time God
began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
And God, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren,
Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net
into the sea: for they were fishers. And he saith unto them,
Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they
straightway left [their] nets, and followed him. And going on
from thence, he saw other two brethren, James [the son] of Zebedee,
and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father,
mending their nets; and he called them. And they immediately left
the ship and their father, and followed him.

And God went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching
the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease among the people. And his fame went
throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick people
that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those
which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick,
and those that had the palsy; and he healed them. And there followed
him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and [from] Decapolis,
and [from] Jerusalem, and [from] Judaea, and [from] beyond Jordan.
And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain:
and when he was set, his disciples came unto him: And he opened
his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed [are] the poor in spirit:
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when
[men] shall revile you, and persecute [you,] and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great [is] your reward
in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt
have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it
is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and
to be trodden under foot of men.
Ye are the light of the world. A city that
is set on an hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light
a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law,
or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.
For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law,
till all be fulfilled.

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach [them,]
the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed
[the righteousness] of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time,
Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in
danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, That whosoever
is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger
of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;
Leave there thy gift before the altar,
and go thy way; first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift. Agree with thine adversary quickly,
whiles thou art in the way with him;
lest at any time the adversary deliver
thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 
Verily I say unto thee,
Thou shalt by no means come out
thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
Ye have heard that it was said
by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:
But I say unto you,
That whosoever looketh on a woman
to lust after her hath committed adultery
with her already in his heart. And if
thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out,
and cast [it] from thee: for it is profitable
for thee that one of thy members
should perish, and not [that] thy whole
body should be cast into hell. And if
thy right hand offend thee, cut it off,
and cast it from thee: for it is profitable
for thee that one of thy members
should perish, and not [that] thy whole
body should be cast into hell. It hath
been said, Whosoever shall put away
his wife, let him give her a writing
of divorcement: But I say unto you,
That whosoever shall put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, causeth
her to commit adultery: and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.
Again, ye have heard that it hath
been said by them of old time, Thou
shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform
unto the Lord thine oaths: But I say
unto you, Swear not at all; neither
by heaven; for it is God’s throne:
Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool:
neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city
of the great King. Neither shalt thou
swear by thy head, because thou canst
not make one hair white or black.
But let your communication be, Yea, yea;
Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than
these cometh of evil. Ye have heard
that it hath been said, An eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But
I say unto you, That ye resist not
evil: but whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also. And if any man will
sue thee at the law, and take away
thy coat, let him have [thy] cloke also.
And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a mile, go with him twain.
Give to him that asketh thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee turn
not thou away. Ye have heard that
it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour,
and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you,
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
That ye may be the children of your Father
which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun
to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
For if ye love them which love you,
what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if
ye salute your brethren only, what do
ye more [than others
